The word for boring or bought is aborido
Aburido.
A B U R R I D O Aburido.
Now this is boring or bored
One of these words in English is a characteristic and the other one is a state.
Which is which?
Boring.
If I say you are boring, is it a state or a characteristic
Characteristic.
And if I say you are bored, is it a state or a characteristic?
A state.
So in English we have two different words.
To express this difference.
Whereas in Spanish you will just decide whether you're going to use ser or estar.
So you'll have to think about it.
How will you say it is boring?
Es aborido.
Es aburrido.
Good.
He is bored.
Is it a characteristic or a state?
State.
Good.
So he is bored.
Esta aburido.
Esta aburrido.
But he is boring.
Es aburido.
Good.
And she is boring?
Es aburrido.
Oh sorry, ella es aburrido.
Spanish is more subtle than that.
Es aburrida.
They are boring.
Son aburridos.
They abode.
Stan aburidos.
Good.
Están aburridos.
So with some adjectives we get a different meaning depending on whether we use ser or estar.
The word for from in Spanish is de.
De we get this forming part of many Latin English words, for example deliver.
The de of deliver is actually from leva is
to do with freedom like liberation liberation how would you say to liberate liberar good
Libre is free in Spanish.
So again we see this gray area between V and B, between English and Spanish, between
Libre and liver in the liver, just as we did between savi and saber, for example.
So the liver is like
from or of uh freeing which has much more sense if you look at the original meanings of deliver like to deliver a baby
Deliver me from evil rather than to deliver a package, which is a much more modern meaning.
You can see much more the
the ideology in the vocabulary with the other uses.
Another interesting word that we can see this the in in English
is a decipher for example.
Decipher is actually a combination of Arabic and Latin.
You have their meaning of or from.
And cipher from sufr, which means zero in Arabic.
So to decipher is to to go from zero or something like this.
So anyway, we have the for from or of.
Now if I want to ask where is he from, is it a characteristic or a state where you are from?
A characteristic.
Yes, it's not where you are.
It's where you are from.
This is characteristic of you.
So in Spanish we're gonna say from where
Are you?
From where is he?
From where is she?
This is the word order.
So from where is what?
De dónde?
From where is he?
From where are you?
Fumel?
Etc.
De dónde s?
De dónde es?
And u informal, you remember how is UR, u informal?
It's kind of similar to S
De dónde eres?
So this sentence actually will help you remember this kind of irregular form, eres, because you will hear it all the time.
From where are you?
Where are you from?
How would you say where are they from?
They don't design.
But if you want to ask where are they, the location, where are they, how would you ask?
Donde stan.
Good.
Donde stan because now we refer to a state.
So we have this adjective as well, libre, like in deliver, liberation, libre, which means free.
Again, we might mean a state or we might mean characteristic.
Now sometimes to show the difference we might not just
Use ser and star, we might actually also change the way we say it.
So for example, if you want to say I am free
And you mean from your exams, from work?
Do you think you mean a state or a characteristic?
State.
A state.
So how would you say that?
I am free
Estoy libre.
Good.
And libre does not change for masculine-feminine because it ends E.
Only adjectives ending O would change.
Estoy libre.
Good.
Now if you mean as a characteristic, as a characteristic of your personality, you are a free person, then you might say.
Soy libre.
You might also say I am a free person.
So person is persona.
And you could say I am a.
What's a person?
Una persona.
Good.
I am a free person.
Soy una persona libre.
Good.
Persona is feminine, not because of you, because the word is feminine.
So I, as a male, would also say, soy una persona libre.
So it's the noun in itself, persona, that is feminine.
So in this case with libre, there's no problem to move between ser and the star.
You can use libre with ser or with a star to give slightly different meanings
So some adjectives you will be able to move between ser and star and others you won't.
If you want to get around that uncertainty instead of uh
trying out soy libre, you could just say soy una persona libre.
And then because persona is going with soy, because what you are saying in fact is I am a person, soy una persona, then you know you're safe.
Also, different Spanish dialects can have different ideas about what should go with ser and what should go with a estar.
So for example, casado, which means married.
Not cansado, casado comes from casa, literally means housed.
When you're married, you are housed.
Casado, in some places they use with ser and some places they use with estar
They can't agree on whether being married is a characteristic or a state.
If you want to avoid this insecurity about it, you can say
Soy una persona casada.
And then you know that persona is going with soy.
So whatever then describes persona is not important.
Persona goes with soy.
When you say I am a person, then that is characteristic.
Let's explore this idea a little more.
Busy in Spanish is occupied, occupado, occupado.
Ocupado.
Good.
How do you say I am busy?
Estoy occupada.
Now, if I want to say I'm a busy person.
Then with this adjective actually I can't switch to soy and say soy ocupado.
That's bad Spanish.
But you as a Spanish learner, how are you supposed to know that?
So you can use persona as a safety net.
In the sense of I am a busy person, and then you're sure it's perfect Spanish.
So how would you say I am a busy person?
Soy una persona occupada.
Good.
So that's a characteristic because what you're actually saying is I am a person.
And much more characteristic than that you can't get.
So estoy occupado as a state, and then soy una persona occupada.
Characteristic.
Males or females would say persona occupada.
Occupada refers to persona, not to the speaker.
So I would also say soy una persona occupada.
How would you say we are busy?
Estamos occupados.
Somos personas ocupadas.
Good.
To be worried is to be preoccupied.
So how do you think that would sound?
Preoccupado.
I'm worried.
Estoy preoccupada.
Good.
He is worried?
He is a worried person.
He is worried as a characteristic.
He is worryful.
Es una persona preoccupada.
Good.